Thank you all very, very much! Thank you for that amazing welcome!
Thank you all for the great convention that we've had.

And Chelsea, thank you. I am so proud to be your mother and so proud of the woman you've become. Thank you for bringing Mark into our family and Charlotte and Aidan into the world.

And Bill, that conversation we started in the law library 45 years ago ... it is still going strong.

You know, that conversation has lasted through good times that filled us with joy and hard times that tested us. And I've even gotten a few words in along the way.

On Tuesday night I was so happy to see that my "explainer in chief" is still on the job.

I'm also grateful to the rest of my family and to the friends of a lifetime.

To all of you whose hard work brought us here tonight and to those of you who joined this campaign this week, thank you. What a remarkable week it's been!

We heard the man from Hope, Bill Clinton, and the man of hope, Barack Obama. America is stronger because of President Obama's leadership. And I'm better because of his friendship.

We heard from our terrific vice president, the one and only Joe Biden.

He spoke from his big heart about our party's commitment to working people as only he can do.

And first lady Michelle Obama reminded us that our children are watching. And the president we elect is going to be their president, too.

And for those of you out there who are just getting to know Tim Kaine you will soon understand why the people of Virginia keep promoting him from city council and mayor to governor and now senator. And he will make our whole country proud as our vice president.

And I want to thank Bernie Sanders.

Bernie, your campaign inspired millions of Americans, particularly the young people who threw their hearts and souls into our primary.

You've put economic and social justice issues front and center where they belong.

And to all of your supporters here and around the country, I want you to know I've heard you. Your cause is our cause.

Our country needs your ideas, energy and passion. That is the only way we can turn our progressive platform into real change for America. We wrote it together, now let's go out and make it happen together!

My friends, we've come to Philadelphia, the birthplace of our nation, because what happened in this city 240 years ago still has something to teach us today. We all know the story, but we usually focus on how it turned out and not enough on how close that story came to never being written at all.

When representatives from 13 unruly colonies met just down the road from here, some wanted to stick with the king and some wanted to stick it to the king.

The Revolution hung in the balance, and somehow they began listening to each other, compromising, finding common purpose. And by the time they left Philadelphia, they had begun to see themselves as one nation. That's what made it possible to stand up to a king. That took courage, they had courage. Our Founders embraced the enduring truth that we are stronger together.

Now America is once again at a moment of reckoning. Powerful forces are threatening to pull us apart. Bonds of trust and respect are fraying. And just as with our Founders, there are no guarantees. It truly is up to us. We have to decide whether we will all work together so we can all rise together.

Our country's motto is E Pluribus Unum, out of many we are one. Will we stay true to that motto?

Well, we heard Donald Trump's answer last week at his convention. He wants to divide us from the rest of the world and from each other. He's betting that the perils of today's world will blind us to its unlimited promise. He's taken the Republican Party a long way, from morning in America to midnight in America.

He wants us to fear the future and fear each other. Well, you know, a great Democratic President Franklin Delano Roosevelt came up with the perfect rebuke to Trump more than 80 years ago during a much more perilous time: The only thing we have to fear is fear itself!

Now, we are clear-eyed about what our country is up against. But we are not afraid. We will rise to the challenge just as we always have. We will not build a wall; instead, we will build an economy where everyone who wants a good job can get one. And we'll build a path to citizenship for millions of immigrants who are already contributing to our economy.

We will not ban a religion. We will work with all Americans and our allies to fight and defeat terrorism.

Yet, we know there is a lot to do. Too many people haven't had a pay raise since the crash. There's too much inequality, too little social mobility, too much paralysis in Washington.

Too many threats at home and abroad. But just look for a minute at the strengths we bring as Americans to meet these challenges.

We have the most dynamic and diverse people in the world.

We have the most tolerant and generous young people we've ever had.

We have the most powerful military, the most innovative entrepreneurs, the most enduring values, freedom and equality, justice and opportunity, we should be so proud that those words are associated with us.

I have to tell you, as your secretary of state I went to 112 countries. When people hear those words, they hear America!

So don't let anyone tell you that our country is weak. We're not. Don't let anyone tell you we don't have what it takes. We do. And most of all, don't believe anyone who says I alone can fix it.

Yes, those were actually Donald Trump's words in Cleveland. And they should set off alarm bells for all of us. Really? I alone can fix it? Isn't he forgetting troops on the front lines, police officers and firefighters who run toward danger, doctors and nurses who care for us, teachers who change lives, entrepreneurs who see possibilities in every problem, mothers who lost children to violence and are building a movement to keep other kids safe? He's forgetting every last one of us.

Americans don't say "I alone can fix it." We say "we'll fix it together!"

And remember, remember, our Founders fought a Revolution and wrote a Constitution so America would never be a nation where one person had all the power.

240 years later, we still put our faith in each other. Look at what happened in Dallas after the assassinations of five brave police officers. Police Chief David Brown asked the community to support his force, maybe even join them. And you know how the community responded? Nearly 500 people applied in just 12 days.

That's how Americans answer when the call for help goes out.

Twenty years ago I wrote a book called "It Takes a Village." And a lot of people looked at the title and asked, what the heck do you mean by that? This is what I mean. None of us can raise a family, build a business, heal a community or lift a country totally alone.

America needs every one of us to lend our energy, our talents, our ambition to making our nation better and stronger. I believe that with all my heart. That's why "stronger together" is not just a lesson from our history, it's not just a slogan for our campaign, it's a guiding principle for the country we've always been and the future we're going to build, a country where the economy works for everyone, not just those at the top.

Where you can get a good job and send your kids to a good school, no matter what ZIP code you live in. A country where all our children can dream and those dreams are within reach, where families are strong, communities are safe and, yes, where love trumps hate.

That's the country we're fighting for. That's the future we're working toward. And so, my friends, it is with humility, determination and boundless confidence in America's promise that I accept your nomination for president of the United States!

Now, sometimes—sometimes—the people at this podium are new to the national stage. As you know, I'm not one of those people. I've been your first lady, served eight years as a senator from the great state of New York, then I represented all of you as secretary of state.

But my job titles only tell you what I've done. They don't tell you why. The truth is, through all these years of public service, the service part has always come easier to me than the public part.

I get it that some people just don't know what to make of me.

So let me tell you. The family I'm from, well, no one had their name on big buildings. My family were builders of a different kind, builders in the way most American families are. They used whatever tools they had, whatever God gave them and whatever life in America provided and built better lives and better futures for their kids.

My grandfather worked in the same Scranton lace mill for 50 years.

Because he believed that if he gave everything he had, his children would have a better life than he did. And he was right. My dad, Hugh, made it to college, he played football at Penn State and enlisted in the Navy after Pearl Harbor. When the war was over, he started his own small business printing fabric for draperies. I remember watching him stand for hours over silkscreens. He wanted to give my brothers and me opportunities he never had, and he did.

My mother, Dorothy, was abandoned by her parents as a young girl. She ended up on her own at 14 working as a housemaid. She was saved by the kindness of others. Her first-grade teacher saw she had nothing to eat at lunch, and brought extra food to share the entire year.

The lessons she passed on to me years later stuck with me. No one gets through life alone. We have to look out for each other and lift each other up. And she made sure I learned the words from our Methodist faith: Do all the good you can for all the people you can in all the ways you can as long as ever you can.

So I went to work for the Children's Defense Fund, going door-to- door in New Bedford, Massachusetts on behalf of children with disabilities who were denied the chance to go to school. I remember meeting a young girl in a wheelchair on the small back porch of her house. She told me how badly she wanted to go to school. It just didn't seem possible in those days. And I couldn't stop thinking of my mother and what she'd gone through as a child.

It became clear to me that simply caring is not enough. To drive real progress, you have to change both hearts and laws. You need both understanding and action.

So we gathered facts, we built a coalition and our work helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities. It's a big idea, isn't it? Every kid with a disability has the right to go to school.

But how? How do you make an idea like that real? You do it step by step, year by year, sometimes even door by door. My heart just swelled when I saw Anastasia Somoza representing millions of young people on this stage.

Because we changed our law to make sure she got an education. So it's true. I sweat the details of policy, whether we're talking about the exact level of lead in the drinking water in Flint, Michigan, the number of mental health facilities in Iowa or the cost of your prescription drugs.

Because it's not just a detail if it's your kid, if it's your family. It's a big deal. And it should be a big deal to you president, too.

After the four days of this convention, you've seen some of the people who have inspired me, people who let me into their lives and became a part of mine, people like Ryan Moore and Lauren Manning. They told their stories Tuesday night.

I first met Ryan as a 7-year old. He was wearing a full-body brace that must have weighed 40 pounds because I leaned over to lift him up. Children like Ryan kept me going when our plan for universal health care failed and kept me working with leaders of both parties to help create the Children's Health Insurance Program that covers 8 million kids in our country.

Lauren Manning, who stood here with such grace and power, was gravely injured on 9/11. It was the thought of her and Debbie St. John who you saw in the movie and John Dolan and Joe Sweeney and all the victims and survivors that kept me working as hard as I could in the Senate on behalf of 9/11 families and our first responders who got sick from their time at ground zero.

I was thinking of Lauren, Debbie and all the others 10 years later in the White House Situation Room when President Obama made the courageous decision that finally brought Osama bin Laden to justice.

And in this campaign, I've met many more people who motivate me to keep fighting for change. And with your help, I will carry all of your voices and stories with me to the White House.

And you heard from Republicans and independents who are supporting our campaign. Well, I will be a president for Democrats, Republicans, independents, for the struggling, the striving, the successful, for all those who vote for me and for those who don't. For all Americans together!

Tonight we've reached a milestone in our nation's march toward a more perfect union. The first time that a major party has nominated a woman for president!

Standing here as my mother's daughter and my daughter's mother, I'm so happy this day has come. I'm happy for grandmothers and little girls and everyone in between. I'm happy for boys and men. Because when any barrier falls in America, it clears the way for everyone.

After all, when there are no ceilings, the sky's the limit!

So let's keep going. Let's keep going until every one of the 161 million women and girls across America has the opportunity she deserves to have!

But even more important than the history we make tonight is the history we will write together in the years ahead.

Let's begin with what we're going to do to help working people in our country get ahead and stay ahead.

Now, I don't think President Obama and Vice President Biden get the credit they deserve for saving us from the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes.

Our economy is so much stronger than when they took office. Nearly 15 million new private sector jobs, 20 million more Americans with health insurance, and an auto industry that just had its best year ever.

Now, that's real progress, but none of us can be satisfied with the status quo, not by a long shot. We're still facing deep-seated problems that developed long before the recession and have stayed with us through the recovery.

I've gone around the country talking to working families and I've heard from many who feel like the economy sure isn't working for them. Some of you are frustrated, even furious. And you know what? You're right. It's not yet working the way it should. Americans are willing to work and work hard, but right now an awful lot of people feel there is less and less respect for the work they do and less respect for them, period.

Democrats, we are the party of working people.

But we haven't done a good enough job showing we get what you're going through, and we're going to do something to help. So tonight I want to tell you how we will empower Americans to live better lives.

My primary mission as president will be to create more opportunity and more good jobs with rising wages right here in the United States.

From my first day in office to my last, especially in places that for too long have been left out and left behind, from our inner cities to our small towns, from Indian country to coal country, from communities ravaged by addiction, to regions hollowed out by plant closures.

And here's what I believe. I believe America thrives when the middle class thrives. I believe our economy isn't working the way it should because our democracy isn't working the way it should.

That's why we need to appoint Supreme Court justices who will get money out of politics and expand voting rights, not restrict them.

And if necessary, we will pass a constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United!

I believe American corporations that have gotten so much from our country should be just as patriotic in return. Many of them are, but too many aren't. It's wrong to take tax breaks with one hand and give out pink slips with the other.

And I believe Wall Street can never, ever be allowed to wreck Main Street again.

And I believe in science!

I believe climate change is real and that we can save our planet while creating millions of good-paying, clean-energy jobs.

I believe that when we have millions of hardworking immigrants contributing to our economy, it would be self-defeating and inhumane to try to kick them out.

Comprehensive immigration reform will grow our economy and keep families together. And it's the right thing to do.

So whatever party you belong to or if you belong to no party at all, if you share these beliefs, this is your campaign.

If you believe that companies should share profits, not pad executive bonuses, join us!

If you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage and no one working full time should have to raise their children in poverty, join us!

If you believe that every man, woman and child in America has the right to affordable health care, join us!

If you believe that we should say no to unfair trade deals, that we should stand up to China, that we should support our steelworkers and autoworkers and home-grown manufacturers, then join us!

If you believe we should expand Social Security and protect a woman's right to make her own health care decisions, then join us!

And yes, yes, if you believe that your working mother, wife, sister or daughter deserves equal pay, join us!

That's how we're going to make sure this economy works for everyone, not just those at the top.

Now, you didn't hear any of this, did you, from Donald Trump at his convention? He spoke for 70-odd minutes—and I do mean odd—and he offered zero solutions. But we already know he doesn't believe these things. No wonder he doesn't like talking about his plans. You might have noticed I love talking about mine.

In my first 100 days, we will work with both parties to pass the biggest investment in new, good-paying jobs since World War II. Jobs in manufacturing, clean energy, technology and innovation, small business and infrastructure. If we invest in infrastructure now, we'll not only create jobs today, but lay the foundation for the jobs of the future. And we will also transform the way we prepare our young people for those jobs.

Bernie Sanders and I will work together to make college tuition free for the middle class and debt free for all.

We will also liberate millions of people who already have student debt.

It's just not right that Donald Trump can ignore his debts and students and families can't refinance their debts.

And something we don't say often enough, sure, college is crucial, but a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job.

We will help more people learn a skill or practice a trade and make a good living doing it.

We will give small businesses, like my dad's, a boost, make it easier to get credit. Way too many dreams die in the parking lots of banks. In America, if you can dream it you should be able to build it.

And we will help you balance family and work. And you know what? If fighting for affordable child care and paid family leave is playing the woman card, then deal me in!

Now, here's the other thing.

Now, we're not only going to make all of these investments, we're going to pay for every single one of them. And here's how: Wall Street, corporations and the super rich are going to start paying their fair share of taxes.

This is not because we resent success. But when more than 90 percent of the gains have gone to the top 1 percent, that's where the money is. And we are going to follow the money.

And if companies take tax breaks and then ship jobs overseas, we'll make them pay us back and we'll put that money to work where it belongs, creating jobs here at home.

Now, I imagine that some of you are sitting at home thinking, well, that all sounds pretty good, but how are you going to get it done? How are you going to break through the gridlock in Washington?

Well, look at my record. I've worked across the aisle to pass laws and treaties and to launch new programs that help millions of people. And if you give me the chance, that's exactly what I'll do as president.

But then I also imagine people are thinking out there, but Trump, he's a businessman, he must know something about the economy.

Well, let's take a closer look, shall we? In Atlantic City, 60 miles from here, you will find contractors and small businesses who lost everything because Donald Trump refused to pay his bills.

Now, remember what the president said last night: Don't boo; vote!

But think of this. People who did the work and needed the money, not because he couldn't pay them, but because he wouldn't pay them. He just stiffed them. And you know that sales pitch he's making to be president, put your faith in him and you'll win big? That's the same sales pitch he made to all those small businesses. Then Trump walked away and left working people holding the bag.

He also talks a big game about putting America first. Well, please explain what part of "America first" leads him to make Trump ties in China, not Colorado, Trump suits in Mexico, not Michigan, Trump furniture in Turkey, not Ohio, Trump picture frames in India, not Wisconsin?

Donald Trump says he wants to make America great again. Well, he could start by actually making things in America again.

Now, the choice we face in this election is just as stark when it comes to our national security.

You know, anyone—anyone—reading the news can see the threats and turbulence we face, from Baghdad to Kabul to Nice and Paris and Brussels, from San Bernardino to Orlando. We're dealing with determined enemies that must be defeated.

So it's no wonder that people are anxious and looking for reassurance, looking for steady leadership, wanting a leader who understands we are stronger when we work with our allies around the world and care for our veterans here at home.

Keeping our nation safe and honoring the people who do that work will be my highest priority. I'm proud that we've put a lid on Iran's nuclear program without firing a single shot.

Now we have to enforce it. And we must keep supporting Israel's security.

I'm proud that we shaped a global climate agreement. Now we have to hold every country accountable to their commitments, including ourselves.

And I'm proud to stand by our allies in NATO against any threat they face, including from Russia.

I've laid out my strategy for defeating ISIS. We will strike their sanctuaries from the air and support local forces taking them out on the ground. We will surge our intelligence so we detect and prevent attacks before they happen. We will disrupt their efforts online to reach and radicalize young people in our country.

It won't be easy or quick, but make no mistake we will prevail.

Now, Donald Trump, Donald Trump says, and this is a quote, "I know more about ISIS than the generals do." No, Donald, you don't.

He thinks he knows more than our military because he claimed our armed forces are a disaster.

Well, I've had the privilege to work closely with our troops and our veterans for many years, including as a senator on the Armed Services Committee, and I know how wrong he is. Our military is a national treasure. We entrust our commander in chief to make the hardest decisions our nation faces, decisions about war and peace, life and death. A president should respect the men and women who risk their lives to serve our country...including Captain Khan and the sons of Tim Kaine and Mike Pence, both Marines.

So just ask yourself, do you really think Donald Trump has the temperament to be commander in chief? Donald Trump can't even handle the rough and tumble of a presidential campaign. He loses his cool at the slightest provocation, when he's gotten a tough question from a reporter, when he's challenged in a debate, when he sees a protester at a rally. Imagine, if you dare, imagine, imagine him in the Oval Office facing a real crisis.

A man you can bait with a tweet is not a man we can trust with nuclear weapons!

I can't put it any better than Jackie Kennedy did after the Cuban Missile Crisis. She said that what worried President Kennedy during that very dangerous time was that a war might be started not by big men with self-control and restraint, but by little men, the ones moved by fear and pride.

America's strength doesn't come from lashing out. It relies on smarts, judgment, cool resolve and the precise and strategic application of power. And that's the kind of commander in chief I pledge to be.

And if we're serious about keeping our country safe, we also can't afford to have a president who's in the pocket of the gun lobby.

I'm not here to repeal the Second Amendment. I'm not here to take away your guns. I just don't want you to be shot by someone who shouldn't have a gun in the first place.

We will work tirelessly with responsible gun owners to pass common sense reforms and keep guns out of the hands of criminals, terrorists and all others who would do us harm.

You know, for decades people have said this issue was too hard to solve and the politics too hot to touch. But I ask you, how can we just stand by and do nothing? You heard, you saw family members of people killed by gun violence, on this stage. You heard, you saw family members of police officers killed in the line of duty because they were outgunned by criminals.

I refuse to believe we can't find common ground here. We have to heal the divides in our country, not just on guns, but on race, immigration and more.

And that starts with listening, listening to each other, trying as best we can to walk in each other's shoes. So let's put ourselves in the shoes of young black and Latino men and women who face the effects of systemic racism and are made to feel like their lives are disposable!

Let's put ourselves in the shoes of police officers kissing their kids and spouses good-bye every day, heading off to do a dangerous and necessary job. We will reform our criminal justice system from end to end and rebuild trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve.

And we will defend all our rights, civil rights, human rights and voting rights, women's rights and workers' rights, LGBT rights and the rights of people with disabilities.

And we will stand up against mean and divisive rhetoric wherever it comes from. You know, for the past year many people made the mistake of laughing off Donald Trump's comments, excusing him as an entertainer just putting on a show.

They thought he couldn't possibly mean all the horrible things he says. Like when he called women pigs, or said that an American judge couldn't be fair because of his Mexican heritage, or when he mocks and mimics a reporter with a disability or insults prisoners of war, like John McCain, a hero and a patriot who deserves our respect.

Now, at first, at first, I admit, I couldn't he meant it either. It was just too hard to fathom that someone who wants to lead our nation could say those things, could be like that. But here's the sad truth: There is no other Donald Trump, this is it.

And in the end, it comes down to what Donald Trump doesn't get: America is great because America is good!

So enough with the bigotry and the bombast. Donald Trump's not offering real change, he's offering empty promises. And what are we offering? A bold agenda to improve the lives of people across our country to keep you safe, to get you good jobs, to get your kids the opportunities they deserve.

The choice is clear, my friends. Every generation of Americans has come together to make our country freer, fairer and stronger. None of us ever have or can do it alone. I know that at a time when so much seems to be pulling us apart, it can be hard to imagine how we'll ever pull together. But I'm here to tell you tonight progress is possible. I know because I've seen it in the lives of people across America who get knocked down and get right back up.

And I know it from my own life. More than a few times I've had to pick myself up and get back in the game.

Like so much else in my life, I got this from my mother, too. She never let me back down from any challenge. When I tried to hide from a neighborhood bully, she literally blocked the door, go back out there, she said. And she was right.

You have to stand up to bullies. You have to keep working to make things better, even when the odds are long and the opposition is fierce.

We lost our mother a few years ago, but I miss her every day. And I still hear her voice urging me to keep working, keep fighting for right no matter what. That's what we need to do together as a nation.

And though we may not live to see the glory, as the song from the musical "Hamilton" goes, let us gladly join the fight, let our legacy be about planting seeds in a garden you never get to see. That's why we're here, not just in this hall, but on this earth. The Founders showed us that and so have many others since. They were drawn together by love of country and the selfless passion to build something better for all who follow.

That is the story of America. And we begin a new chapter tonight.

Yes, the world is watching what we do. Yes, America's destiny is ours to choose. So let's be stronger together, my fellow Americans!

Let's look to the future with courage and confidence. Let's build a better tomorrow for our beloved children and our beloved country. And when we do, America will be greater than ever!

Thank you, and may God bless you and the United States of America!

Thank you. Thank you, Temple! I am so delighted to be here with all of you. I saw how much fun President Obama had last week and – I wanted to be here in Philadelphia.
Before I begin with my remarks, I do want to say how proud I am of our brave first responders working to keep us safe after the attacks of the last weekend in New York, New Jersey and Minnesota. There are now reports of a suspect in custody, but we must remain vigilant. This is a fast-moving situation and a sobering reminder that we need steady leadership in a dangerous world.

I'm here to talk about a number of the issues that are part of this election but really, much more than that, they are part of our future – the kind of country we want to have, the kind of people we want to be and, particularly, what kind of opportunities we should be providing for the young people of America. I have a proud Owl on my staff, Jamira Burley. A Philadelphia native who became an activist working to end the epidemic of gun violence right here in Philadelphia. She loves Temple and we love her. And I also want to thank Lauren for that introduction.

Jamira and Lauren are two examples of why I do have so much faith in our future. Your generation is the most inclusive, progressive and entrepreneurial that we've ever seen. And as you heard, when Lauren was in college, she saw challenges facing students of color, but there was no NAACP chapter to support them and promote diversity and inclusion on campus – so she started one. And Lauren remains committed and engaged, working with an organization called Generation Progress, because she understands that active citizenship is a lifelong job and the call to service never fades.

Now, I know that with so much negativity out there, it is really easy to get cynical – especially about our politics. I remember wrestling with that challenge when I was a student during the Vietnam War. It can be tempting to think that no one will tell you the truth and nothing's ever going to change. But you're here today because you refuse to accept cynicism. You know that the next 50 days will shape the next 50 years. And you see how much needs fixing in our country, from the soaring cost of college to the scourge of systemic racism to the threat from climate change – but you also know the only way we can meet those challenges is if we meet them together.

You're here today because you believe we can do just that. You want something to vote for, not just against. Optimism, not resentment. Answers, not anger. Ideas, not insults. Bridges, not walls. You're also here because you know this election isn't a reality TV show. It shouldn't be about birth certificates or name-calling or stunts to get onto cable news.

This election comes down to a choice between two very different visions for America. I believe it's wrong to tear each down. We should be lifting each other up. It's wrong to let income inequality get even worse. We have to make the economy work for everyone, not just those at the top. And it's wrong to put a loose cannon in charge who could start another war. We should work with our allies to keep us safe.

It comes down to this: Are we going to pit Americans against each other and deepen the divides in this country, or are we going to be, as I know we can, stronger together?

I know what I believe, and I'm going to close my campaign the same way I started my career – fighting for kids and young people and families. That has been the cause of my life. And it will be the passion of my presidency, and I hope you'll join me. We can't get distracted when the media or my opponent turns this election into a circus. My husband has a saying about that. He calls it majoring in the minors – getting so wrapped up in stuff that doesn't matter, you forget what's really important to your future and to the future of this country.

Take the challenges facing young Americans today. First of all, if you're willing to work hard, you should be able to find a good job that pays well and lets you do what you love and make your mark in the world. But that's been out of reach for too many young people – trying to find your footing in the wake of the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. That's why Tim Kaine and I have a plan to work with both parties and make a historic investment in good new jobs. We can create millions of jobs and make life a lot better by doing things like connecting every household to broadband by 2020; installing half a billion solar panels; building a cleaner, more resilient electric grid with enough renewable energy to power every home in the country.

Next, getting an education should give you a boost, not hold you back. But as you know better than most, tuition keeps going through the roof and debt keeps piling up. I understand that Temple was founded to democratize, diversify and widen the reach of higher education. That is still a vital goal.

So I worked with Bernie Sanders on a plan. We came up with a plan that makes public college tuition-free for working families and debt-free for everyone. And if you already have debt, we will help you refinance it and pay it back as a percentage of your income so you're never on the hook for more than you can afford. You can actually see how much you and your family can save under our plan by looking at the College Calculator at hillaryclinton.com.

And here's something we don't talk about enough: a four-year degree should not be the only path to a good job in America. People should be able to learn a skill, practice a trade, and making a good living because of that. So we're offering new tax credits to encourage companies to offer paid apprenticeships that let you earn while you learn and do more to dignify skills across the board – for welders, machinists, health technicians, coders, and so many other fields.

Another challenge I hear about all the time is from new parents about how hard it is to balance the demands of work and family in today's economy. Families look different today than they did decades ago, I think we can all agree. Most need two incomes just to get by. And many people now change jobs frequently and have wildly unpredictable schedules, or they have to cobble together part-time work, all without the basic supports available to parents in nearly every other advanced country.

That's why Tim Kaine and I have a plan to help working families with quality, affordable childcare, preschool and paid family leave. We fundamentally believe – the more we can strengthen families, the stronger we will be as a nation.

Everywhere I go, young people also share their concerns about the divisiveness and discrimination we see in America today. You aren't – and you shouldn't be – satisfied with the progress we've made. You should keep wanting to right wrongs and fight for justice and dignify for all. We see, as Lauren said, too many young black men and women made to feel like their lives are disposable; too many immigrants living in fear of deportation; too many young LGBT Americans bullied; too many young women and men sexually assaulted on campus or in the military or at home. And more than previous generations, you understand that all these challenges are intersecting, and we must take them on together.

But you also see a Republican nominee for president who incites hatred and violence like we've never seen before in any campaign. Hate speech being normalized. The dog whistles are out in the open. And yet, despite this, I remain convinced America's best days are ahead of us. In large part, that's because of the inspiring young people I meet every day.

I'm inspired by Astrid. I met her in Las Vegas last summer. She was brought to this country from Mexico at the age of four with nothing but a doll, a cross, and the dress she was wearing. Now she's in her twenties and advocating for the rights of undocumented Americans and comprehensive immigration reform. We should all join her in this.

I'm inspired by Mikey, who I met in New York. Mikey spent six months in prison for a low-level drug offense. After he got out, Mikey discovered just how hard it is for people who've done their time to find good jobs and opportunities. But he persisted, and he managed to start his own ice cream shop in New York – and I can recommend, it's delicious. We have to do more to help others get that second chance, including by banning the box and reforming our criminal justice system.

I'm inspired by Erica, one of the bravest young women I've ever met. Her mother, Dawn, was the principal of Sandy Hook School who died trying to protect her students. Erica was devastated. But then, she made it her mission to advocate for commonsense gun safety reforms. It's been painful for her – a lot of hate has come her way and the gun lobby is so powerful – but Erica won't give up. As she said, 'What if everyone who faced tough odds said, it's hard, so I'm going to walk away? That's not the type of world I want to live in.'

That's the spirit that makes this country great – we might get knocked down, but we get right back up again. And we refuse to quit, no matter what. And that's the spirit we need in this election too.

Now, I know that with Washington paralyzed by big money and partisanship, the gap between the change we want and the progress that politics should deliver can look like a chasm. I also know that even if you're totally opposed to Donald Trump, you may still have some questions about me. I get that. And I want to do my best to answer those questions.

When it comes to public service, the 'service' part has always easier for me than the 'public' part. I will never be the showman my opponent is – and you know what, that's okay with me. And it's also true I do spend a lot of time on the details of policy, like the precise interest rate on your student loans, right down to the decimal. But that's because it's not a detail for you. It's a big deal. And it should be a big deal to your president.

So here's what I ask any voter who is still undecided: Give us both a fair hearing. Hold us accountable for our ideas, both of us. I can't promise you'll agree with me all the time, but I can promise you this: No one will work harder to make your life better. I will never stop, no matter how tough it gets. In fact, you can read about what Tim and I want to do. We're not keeping it a secret. We've got a book called 'Stronger Together.'

But let me tell you a little bit about the values that drive me and my vision for the future because you deserve that from anyone from anyone running for president. I want to share with you the stories of three women who at pivotal moments changed my life and set me on a course of social justice, activism, and public service.

The first woman is my mother. Her name was Dorothy, and she was abandoned by her parents as a young girl. She ended up out on her own at 14, working as a housemaid. When I learned about this many years later, I asked how she managed to grow up into a warm, loving person and not become bitter and broken. And here's what she said, one word: 'kindness.' She was saved by the kindness of others. Like the teacher who saw she had nothing to eat at lunch and brought extra food to share. The lesson she passed on to me was simple but powerful: No one gets through life alone. We have to look out for each other and lift each other up. She made sure I learned the words of one of the creeds of our Methodist faith: Do all the good you can for all the people you can in all the ways you can as long as ever you can.

That mission guides me still today. When I stumble, it helps pick me up, because there's always more good to do and more people to help if we keep our eyes open, especially kids.

When I met a terrified little girl in Nevada who burst into tears because she worried her parents would be deported, it hit me right in the gut. I knew how hard-working her parents were. I knew the sacrifices they were making so that she could have a better life. When I met a little boy in Flint, Michigan who got sick from drinking water poisoned with lead, it just made me so angry and determined to work even harder. Every one of our children deserves the chance to share in the promise of America.

The second woman I want to tell you about is Marian Wright Edelman. She was a lawyer for the NAACP in Mississippi, first African American woman to pass the Mississippi bar. She was an ally of Dr. King and Robert Kennedy, and the founder of the Children's Defense Fund, an altogether remarkable person. One day during my first semester in law school, I saw a flyer – we used to have those, flyers on a campus bulletin board. And Marian was coming to give a lecture. I made sure to be there, and what I heard was captivating. Marian talked about creating a Head Start program in Mississippi and using her legal education to make life better for poor children and families. Something just clicked in my brain. I began to see how I could translate the commitment to helping others I'd learned from my mother, my church, into real social change. I went up to her and I said, 'Could I work for you this summer?' She said, 'Sure, but I can't pay you.' I said, 'Well, I am paying my way through law school, so I have to get paid.' She said, 'Well, if you can figure out how to get paid, you can have a job.' So I figured out how to get a grant to get paid and went to work for her.

After graduation, I could have followed my classmates to a high-powered law firm, but I went to work for Marian at the Children's Defense Fund instead. She sent me door to door in New Bedford, Massachusetts on behalf of children with disabilities who were denied the chance to go to school back then. And I remember meeting a young girl in a wheelchair on the small back porch of her house. She told me how badly she wanted an education, but it just didn't seem possible. My heart went out to her and I wanted to help. But it became clear to me that simply caring is not enough. That wouldn't force the public school to build more wheelchair ramps or put more resources into special education. I learned that to drive real progress, you have to change both hearts and laws. So we gathered evidence. We built a coalition. And our work helped convince Congress to ensure access to education for all students with disabilities. And that experience turned me into a lifelong advocate for children and families.

I went to South Carolina to investigate the plight of 12- and 13-year-old boys imprisoned alongside grown men who had committed serious felonies. In Alabama I helped expose the racism of segregated academies. In Arkansas I ran a legal aid clinic that provided representation to poor families and prison inmates who could not afford it. When Bill was elected President, a lot of people were surprised, and even threatened, by the idea of an activist as First Lady. But I wasn't about to quit then, either. I fought for universal health care, and ended up working with Republicans and Democrats in Congress to create the Children's Health Insurance Program, which covers eight million kids today.

The third woman who changed my life was named Sophia, the 17-year-old captain of a high school basketball team in New York City. It was the late 1990s, and Democrats in New York were urging me to run for the Senate, and I kept telling them no. After all, no First Lady had ever done anything like that. I myself hadn't run for anything since student council. I'd always been an advocate, not a politician. But then one day I visited that school in New York for an event with young women athletes with Billie Jean King. Hanging above our heads was a big banner that said, 'Dare to compete.' Before my speech, Sophia introduced me. She was tall, and as we shook hands, she bent over and whispered in my ear, 'Dare to compete, Mrs. Clinton. Dare to compete.' Once again, something just clicked. For years I had been telling young women to step up. Participate. Go for what you believe in. Could it be I was afraid to do something I had urge so many others to do?

Well, it was a difficult transition, becoming a candidate for the first time back in that New York Senate race. Even all these years later, I confess I don't enjoy doing some of the things that come naturally to most politicians, like talking about myself. But I took that leap then for the same reason I'm running now, to even the odds for those who've got the odds stacked against them, especially children and families. And I've learned that in a democracy, if you want to help the greatest number of people, you have to push for reform from both the outside in and the inside out. We need activists and advocates, entrepreneurs and innovators, teachers and mentors, people who change lives every day in a million quiet ways. We also need strong, principled leaders who can win votes, write laws, allocate resources, and do the slow, hard business of governing.

Now, of course, politics can be discouraging. This election in particularly can be down-right depressing sometimes. But it matters. It really does. It matters for our families, our communities, and our country and the world. Our most cherished values are at stake. Every election is important, from school board to state senate to president. But this time is different. We are facing a candidate with a long history of racial discrimination in his businesses, who retweets white supremacists, who led the birther movement to delegitimize our first black President, and he's still lying about it today. He refuses to apologize to President Obama, his family, and the American people. We have to stand up to this hate. We cannot let it go on.

And when we do that, we send a clear message: America is better than this. America is better than Donald Trump. Just as important, we have a chance to make real progress together in our country. I need you. I need you as partners, not just for winning this election, but for driving real change over the next four years. The fights ahead of us are bigger than one election, one president, or even one generation. It's going to take all of us working side-by-side to build the kind of future we want. That's why, if I'm in the White House, young people will always have a seat at any table where any decision is being made.

So if you believe diversity is America's strength, not America's burden, join us. If you believe the minimum wage should be a living wage and no one working full-time should have to raise their children in poverty, join us. If you believe that climate change is real and that we can save our planet while creating millions of good-paying clean energy jobs, join us. If you believe that every man, woman, and child in America has the right to affordable, quality health care, join us. If you believe we should finally guarantee equal pay for women, join us.

And here's how you can join us. Go to iwillvote.com and register today. Register your friends. Register everyone you know. This is going to be close. We need everyone off the sidelines. Not voting is not an option. That just plays into Trump's hands. It really does. Text 'join,' j-o-i-n, to 47246 right now, or go to hillaryclinton.com and sign up to volunteer. I understand here at Temple you're already organizing campaign tailgates at every football game and having a lot of fun doing it. We have 50 days, 50 days, to reach everybody we possibly can, to not only win an election – that's just the first step – then to keep the progress going, go even further, make it absolutely clear that we're going to shape a future that represents the best of who we are. So talk to your classmates. Talk to your neighbors. Help us stand up for our best values and reject prejudice and paranoia.

You know, I mentioned my mother and the kindness she experienced. Her life was so neglected that when she went to work as that housekeeper/babysitter at the age of 14, it was the first time she ever saw a family that loved each other, where the parents loved their children, cared for them, planned for them, where she learned the lessons that enabled her to be such an extraordinary mother to me and my brothers. Everything I've learned in my life convinces me that love trumps hate.

So please join us in working together. There's no doubt in my mind that young people have more at stake in this election than any other age group. And when you turn out and vote this fall, we will be sending a message much larger than even the outcome. We will say we can build a future where all our children have the opportunity to live up to their God-given potential, no matter who they are, where they're from, what they look like, or who they love. That's the America we believe in. That's the America worth fighting for. That's what we've got to do to stand together. We are stronger together, and let's make sure love trumps hate. Thank you all!