Thank you all very much for being here and for all the support that you have given me over the years: as the mayor of this great city, as Vermont's only congressman and now as a U.S. senator. Thanks also to my longtime friends and fellow Vermonters Bill McKibben, Brenda Torpey, Donna Bailey, Mike O'Day and Ben and Jerry for all that you do — and for your very generous remarks. Thanks also to Jenny Nelson for moderating this event and for your leadership in Vermont agriculture.

I also want to thank my family: My wife Jane, my brother Larry, my children Levi, Heather, Carina and Dave for their love and support, and my seven beautiful grandchildren — Sonny, Cole, Ryleigh, Grayson, Ella, Tess and Dylan who provide so much joy in my life.

Today, here in our small state — a state that has led the nation in so many ways — I am proud to announce my candidacy for president of the United States of America.

Today, with your support and the support of millions of people throughout this country, we begin a political revolution to transform our country economically, politically, socially and environmentally.

Today, we stand here and say loudly and clearly that; "Enough is enough. This great nation and its government belong to all of the people, and not to a handful of billionaires, their Super-PACs and their lobbyists."

Brothers and sisters: Now is not the time for thinking small. Now is not the time for the same old — same old establishment politics and stale inside-the-beltway ideas.

Now is the time for millions of working families to come together, to revitalize American democracy, to end the collapse of the American middle class and to make certain that our children and grandchildren are able to enjoy a quality of life that brings them health, prosperity, security and joy — and that once again makes the United States the leader in the world in the fight for economic and social justice, for environmental sanity and for a world of peace.

My fellow Americans: This country faces more serious problems today than at any time since the Great Depression and, if you include the planetary crisis of climate change, it may well be that the challenges we face now are direr than any time in our modern history.

Here is my promise to you for this campaign. Not only will I fight to protect the working families of this country, but we're going to build a movement of millions of Americans who are prepared to stand up and fight back. We're going to take this campaign directly to the people — in town meetings, door to door conversations, on street corners and in social media — and that's BernieSanders.com by the way. This week we will be in New Hampshire, Iowa and Minnesota — and that's just the start of a vigorous grassroots campaign.

Let's be clear. This campaign is not about Bernie Sanders. It is not about Hillary Clinton. It is not about Jeb Bush or anyone else. This campaign is about the needs of the American people, and the ideas and proposals that effectively address those needs. As someone who has never run a negative political ad in his life, my campaign will be driven by issues and serious debate; not political gossip, not reckless personal attacks or character assassination. This is what I believe the American people want and deserve. I hope other candidates agree, and I hope the media allows that to happen. Politics in a democratic society should not be treated like a baseball game, a game show or a soap opera. The times are too serious for that.

Let me take a minute to touch on some of the issues that I will be focusing on in the coming months, and then give you an outline of an Agenda for America which will, in fact, deal with these problems and lead us to a better future.

Income and Wealth Inequality: Today, we live in the wealthiest nation in the history of the world but that reality means very little for most of us because almost all of that wealth is owned and controlled by a tiny handful of individuals. In America we now have more income and wealth inequality than any other major country on earth, and the gap between the very rich and everyone is wider than at any time since the 1920s. The issue of wealth and income inequality is the great moral issue of our time, it is the great economic issue of our time and it is the great political issue of our time. And we will address it.

Let me be very clear. There is something profoundly wrong when the top one-tenth of 1 percent owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent, and when 99 percent of all new income goes to the top 1 percent. There is something profoundly wrong when, in recent years, we have seen a proliferation of millionaires and billionaires at the same time as millions of Americans work longer hours for lower wages and we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of any major country on earth. There is something profoundly wrong when one family owns more wealth than the bottom 130 million Americans. This grotesque level of inequality is immoral. It is bad economics. It is unsustainable. This type of rigged economy is not what America is supposed to be about. This has got to change and, as your president, together we will change it.

Economics: But it is not just income and wealth inequality. It is the tragic reality that for the last 40 years the great middle class of our country — once the envy of the world — has been disappearing. Despite exploding technology and increased worker productivity, median family income is almost $5,000 less than it was in 1999. In Vermont and throughout this country it is not uncommon for people to be working two or three jobs just to cobble together enough income to survive on and some health care benefits.

The truth is that real unemployment is not the 5.4 percent you read in newspapers. It is close to 11 percent if you include those workers who have given up looking for jobs or who are working part time when they want to work full time. Youth unemployment is over 17 percent and African-American youth unemployment is much higher than that. Today, shamefully, we have 45 million people living in poverty, many of whom are working at low-wage jobs. These are the people who struggle every day to find the money to feed their kids, to pay their electric bills and to put gas in the car to get to work. This campaign is about those people and our struggling middle class. It is about creating an economy that works for all, and not just the one percent.

Citizens United: My fellow Americans: Let me be as blunt as I can and tell you what you already know. As a result of the disastrous Supreme Court decision on Citizens United, the American political system has been totally corrupted, and the foundations of American democracy are being undermined. What the Supreme Court essentially said was that it was not good enough for the billionaire class to own much of our economy. They could now own the U.S. government as well. And that is precisely what they are trying to do.

American democracy is not about billionaires being able to buy candidates and elections. It is not about the Koch brothers, Sheldon Adelson and other incredibly wealthy individuals spending billions of dollars to elect candidates who will make the rich richer and everyone else poorer. According to media reports the Koch brothers alone, one family, will spend more money in this election cycle than either the Democratic or Republican parties. This is not democracy. This is oligarchy. In Vermont and at our town meetings we know what American democracy is supposed to be about. It is one person, one vote — with every citizen having an equal say — and no voter suppression. And that's the kind of American political system we have to fight for and will fight for in this campaign.

Climate Change: When we talk about our responsibilities as human beings and as parents, there is nothing more important than leaving this country and the entire planet in a way that is habitable for our kids and grandchildren. The debate is over. The scientific community has spoken in a virtually unanimous voice. Climate change is real. It is caused by human activity and it is already causing devastating problems in the United States and around the world.

The scientists are telling us that if we do not boldly transform our energy system away from fossil fuels and into energy efficiency and sustainable energies, this planet could be five to ten degrees Fahrenheit warmer by the end of this century. This is catastrophic. It will mean more drought, more famine, more rising sea level, more floods, more ocean acidification, more extreme weather disturbances, more disease and more human suffering. We must not, we cannot, and we will not allow that to happen.

It is no secret that there is massive discontent with politics in America today. In the mid-term election in November, 63 percent of Americans did not vote, including 80 percent of young people. Poll after poll tells us that our citizens no longer have confidence in our political institutions and, given the power of Big Money in the political process, they have serious doubts about how much their vote actually matters and whether politicians have any clue as to what is going on in their lives.

Combatting this political alienation, this cynicism and this legitimate anger will not be easy. That's for sure. But that is exactly what, together, we have to do if we are going to turn this country around — and that is what this campaign is all about.

And to bring people together we need a simple and straight-forward progressive agenda which speaks to the needs of our people, and which provides us with a vision of a very different America. And what is that agenda?

Jobs, Jobs, Jobs: It begins with jobs. If we are truly serious about reversing the decline of the middle class we need a major federal jobs program which puts millions of Americans back to work at decent paying jobs. At a time when our roads, bridges, water systems, rail and airports are decaying, the most effective way to rapidly create meaningful jobs is to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure. That's why I've introduced legislation which would invest $1 trillion over 5 years to modernize our country's physical infrastructure. This legislation would create and maintain at least 13 million good-paying jobs, while making our country more productive, efficient and safe. And I promise you as president I will lead that legislation into law.

I will also continue to oppose our current trade policies. For decades, presidents from both parties have supported trade agreements which have cost us millions of decent paying jobs as corporate America shuts down plants here and moves to low-wage countries. As president, my trade policies will break that cycle of agreements which enrich at the expense of the working people of this country.

Raising Wages: Let us be honest and acknowledge that millions of Americans are now working for totally inadequate wages. The current federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage and must be raised. The minimum wage must become a living wage — which means raising it to $15 an hour over the next few years — which is exactly what Los Angeles recently did — and I applaud them for doing that. Our goal as a nation must be to ensure that no full-time worker lives in poverty. Further, we must establish pay equity for women workers. It's unconscionable that women earn 78 cents on the dollar compared to men who perform the same work. We must also end the scandal in which millions of American employees, often earning less than $30,000 a year, work 50 or 60 hours a week — and earn no overtime. And we need paid sick leave and guaranteed vacation time for all.

Addressing Wealth and Income Inequality: This campaign is going to send a message to the billionaire class. And that is: you can't have it all. You can't get huge tax breaks while children in this country go hungry. You can't continue sending our jobs to China while millions are looking for work. You can't hide your profits in the Cayman Islands and other tax havens, while there are massive unmet needs on every corner of this nation. Your greed has got to end. You cannot take advantage of all the benefits of America, if you refuse to accept your responsibilities.

That is why we need a tax system which is fair and progressive, which makes wealthy individuals and profitable corporations begin to pay their fair share of taxes.

Reforming Wall Street: It is time to break up the largest financial institutions in the country. Wall Street cannot continue to be an island unto itself, gambling trillions in risky financial instruments while expecting the public to bail it out. If a bank is too big to fail it is too big to exist. We need a banking system which is part of the job creating productive economy, not a handful of huge banks on Wall Street which engage in reckless and illegal activities.

Campaign Finance Reform: If we are serious about creating jobs, about climate change and the needs of our children and the elderly, we must be deadly serious about campaign finance reform and the need for a constitutional amendment to overturn Citizens United. I have said it before and I'll say it again. I will not nominate any justice to the Supreme Court who has not made it clear that he or she will move to overturn that disastrous decision which is undermining our democracy. Long term, we need to go further and establish public funding of elections.

Reversing Climate Change: The United States must lead the world in reversing climate change. We can do that if we transform our energy system away from fossil fuels, toward energy efficiency and such sustainable energies such as wind, solar, geo-thermal and bio-mass. Millions of homes and buildings need to be weatherized, our transportation system needs to be energy efficient, and we need a tax on carbon to accelerate the transition away from fossil fuel.

Health Care for All: The United States remains the only major country on earth that does not guarantee health care for all as a right. Despite the modest gains of the Affordable Care Act, 35 million Americans continue to lack health insurance and many more are under-insured. Yet, we continue paying far more per capita for health care than any other nation. The United States must join the rest of the industrialized world and guarantee health care to all as a right by moving toward a Medicare-for-All single-payer system.

Protecting Our Most Vulnerable: At a time when millions of Americans are struggling to keep their heads above water economically, at a time when senior poverty is increasing, at a time when millions of kids are living in dire poverty, my Republican colleagues, as part of their recently-passed budget, are trying to make a terrible situation even worse. If you can believe it, the Republican budget throws 27 million Americans off health insurance, makes drastic cuts in Medicare, throws millions of low-income Americans, including pregnant women off of nutrition programs, and makes it harder for working-class families to afford college or put their kids in the Head Start program. And then, to add insult to injury, they provide huge tax breaks for the very wealthiest families in this country while they raise taxes on working families.

Well, let me tell my Republican colleagues that I respectfully disagree with their approach. Instead of cutting Social Security, we're going to expand Social Security benefits. Instead of cutting Head Start and child care, we are going to move to a universal pre-K system for all the children of this country. As Franklin Delano Roosevelt reminded us, a nation's greatness is judged not by what it provides to the most well-off, but how it treats the people most in need. And that's the kind of nation we must become.

College for All: And when we talk about education, let me be very clear. In a highly competitive global economy, we need the best educated workforce we can create. It is insane and counter-productive to the best interests of our country, that hundreds of thousands of bright young people cannot afford to go to college, and that millions of others leave school with a mountain of debt that burdens them for decades. That must end. That is why, as president, I will fight to make tuition in public colleges and universities free, as well as substantially lower interest rates on student loans.

War and Peace: As everybody knows, we live in a difficult and dangerous world, and there are people out there who want to do us harm. As president, I will defend this nation — but I will do it responsibly. As a member of Congress I voted against the war in Iraq, and that was the right vote. I am vigorously opposed to an endless war in the Middle East — a war which is unwise and unnecessary. We must be vigorous in combatting terrorism and defeating ISIS, but we should not have to bear that burden alone. We must be part of an international coalition, led by Muslim nations, that can not only defeat ISIS but begin the process of creating conditions for a lasting peace.

As some of you know, I was born in a far-away land called Brooklyn, New York. My father came to this country from Poland without a penny in his pocket and without much of an education. My mother graduated high school in New York City. My father worked for almost his entire life as a paint salesman and we were solidly lower-middle class. My parents, brother and I lived in a small rent-controlled apartment. My mother's dream was to move out of that small apartment into a home of our own. She died young and her dream was never fulfilled. As a kid I learned, in many, many ways, what lack of money means to a family. That's a lesson I have never forgotten.

I have seen the promise of America in my own life. My parents would have never dreamed that their son would be a U.S. Senator, let alone run for president. But for too many of our fellow Americans, the dream of progress and opportunity is being denied by the grind of an economy that funnels all the wealth to the top.

And to those who say we cannot restore the dream, I say just look where we are standing. This beautiful place was once an unsightly rail yard that served no public purpose and was an eyesore. As mayor, I worked with the people of Burlington to help turn this waterfront into the beautiful people-oriented public space it is today. We took the fight to the courts, to the legislature and to the people. And we won.

The lesson to be learned is that when people stand together, and are prepared to fight back, there is nothing that can't be accomplished.

We can live in a country:

Where every person has health care as a right, not a privilege;
Where every parent can have quality and affordable childcare and where all of our qualified young people, regardless of income, can go to college;
Where every senior can live in dignity and security, and not be forced to choose between their medicine or their food;
Where every veteran who defends this nation gets the quality health care and benefits they have earned and receives the respect they deserve;
Where every person, no matter their race, their religion, their disability or their sexual orientation realizes the full promise of equality that is our birthright as Americans.
That is the nation we can build together, and I ask you to join me in this campaign to build a future that works for all of us, and not just the few on top.

Thank you, and on this beautiful day on the shore of Lake Champlain, I welcome you aboard.

West Virginia, thank you!
What an extraordinary turnout tonight. Thanks so much for being here.

I want to thank all of you for being here.

I want to thank all of you for being prepared to stand up, fight back, and make this country the nation we know it can become.

This campaign is not just about electing a president; it is about transforming our nation.

It is about having the courage to demand a political revolution.

And you are the revolutionaries because you understand that unlike football or basketball, politics is not a spectator sport.

So let me tell you a secret that many others will not. You are all – each and every one of you – powerful people if you choose to exercise that power.

The fight that we are waging is not an easy fight. But I know you are prepared to wage that fight against the 1%, against the billionaire class and against a small number of people with incredible wealth and incredible power who control our economic life, our political life, and our media life.

When we began this campaign just about a year ago, we started with no political organization. We started with no money and we had no name recognition outside of Vermont.

And I want all of you to get up to Vermont and visit our beautiful state.

And when we began this campaign, the media said "Well, Bernie is a nice guy. He combs his hair really well. Top notch dresser. But nonetheless, he really is a fringe candidate. The campaign is a fringe campaign not to be taken seriously."

And in the middle of all of that, we were taking on the most powerful political organization in America – an organization that elected a president – President Clinton – on two occasions and ran a very strong campaign for president for Secretary Clinton in 2008.

And when we began this campaign, we were about 3% in the national polls. We were about 60 points behind Secretary Clinton. Well, a lot has happened in the last year.

As of today, we have now won 16 primaries and caucuses all over this country.

And with your help, we're going to win here in West Virginia.

We have won over 1,200 delegates to the Democratic National Convention.

And in the last several weeks, the national polls – they don't show us 60 points down. A few of them have us actually ahead or a few points down.

And what is also extremely important, if the Democratic party is to look at which candidate is the candidate to defeat Donald Trump or any other Republican ... [applause]

What we are seeing on national polls which have us 15, 20 points ahead of Donald Trump -- far more than Secretary Clinton. [applause]

Almost -- almost every national poll and every state poll has us defeating Trump and that margin for us is significantly larger than that of Secretary Clinton. [applause]

And the reason that we are doing so much better against Republican candidates is that not only are we winning that overwhelming majority of Democratic votes but we are winning independent votes and some Republican votes as well. [applause]

And that is a point that I hope the delegates to the Democratic convention fully understand. In a general election, everyone -- Democrat, independent, Republican has the right to vote for president. [applause]

The elections are not closed primaries. We were in New York state last week. Three million people in New York state could not vote ... [applause]

Because they were independents. Well, you know what? Those folks and independents all over this country will be voting in November for the next president of the United States. [applause]

And in most cases we win the independent vote by a two to one margin. [applause]

This campaign is doing as well as it is with the extraordinary energy and enthusiasm that we are generating all across this country. Look at -- look at this room here tonight. We have over 6,000 people. [applause]

And the reason that we are generating this enthusiasm is because we are doing something very unusual in contemporary American politics. We are telling the truth. [applause]

Now, the truth is as every person here knows whether it is in our own personal lives or in our broad national political life -- truth is not always pleasant. It's not always something you are happy to hear but if we go forward as human beings -- if we go forward as a nation we cannot sweep the hard realities of our lives underneath the rug. We got to bring it out, we have to deal with it. [applause]

And unfortunately -- unfortunately media in this country for a variety of reasons largely because they're owned by major corporations do not -- do not deal in most cases -- there are great exceptions. But they do not deal with the realities of our lives in a way that we need to be discussing. [applause]

Now let me -- let me just give you a few examples of what I mean and making it really relevant to life here in West Virginia and I've been all over country. I have been all over this country and the things that I have seen are incredibly heartbreaking. I was for Flint, Michigan where children are being poisoned by lead in the water that they are drinking. [applause]

I have been to Detroit, Michigan where their public school system is on the verge of a fiscal collapse. [applause]

I have been to Baltimore, Maryland where tens of thousands of people are addicted to heroin. [applause]

And I know -- I know that addiction is a problem here and we'll get to that in a second. But the point is -- point number one, I want everybody here to know this. Never forget it. We are the wealthiest country in the history of the world but most people in our country don't know that because almost all of the new income and wealth is going to the top one percent. [applause]

We are the wealthiest country in the history of the world and that means that public school systems should not be collapsing. Youth unemployment in this country should not be 30, 40 or 50 percent. Our infrastructure should not be disintegrating. [applause]

So we as a people have got to ask some very hard questions and then have the guts to take on some very powerful people. [applause]

A great nation is not judged by the number of billionaires it has or the number of nuclear weapons it has. It is judged by how it treats the weakest and most vulnerable amongst us. [applause]

It is -- it is not acceptable to me that in America we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of almost any major country on earth. That is not the way we should be treating the young people of this country. [applause]

And right here in West Virginia -- your beautiful state -- 100,000 children in this great state live in poverty. Over 24 percent of the total number of kids right here in West Virginia. [applause]

When we talk about employment, "officially," quote unquote, unemployment in America is supposed to be five percent but you know that that is not the case. Real unemployment is much, much higher than that. [applause]

In fact -- in fact right here in West Virginia this state has the lowest labor force participation rate in the country. In fact, only 54 percent of the working age population in this state has a job. [applause]

When we talk about the grotesque level and I talk about this a lot -- when I talk about the grotesque levels of income and wealth inequality, West Virginia is almost at the top of that list. [applause]

And again -- and again this is a national problem. Believe me, it exists in my state of Vermont but this is an issue we have got to deal with in every state in this country and listen to this. From 1979 to 2012, the top one percent of the people in West Virginia saw their income go up by more than 60 percent on average while the bottom 90 percent saw their income go down ... [applause]

Go down by four tenths of one percent and that is what we are seeing all over America. We have an economy today that is doing really, really, really great if you're in the top one percent. But if you're in the bottom 90 percent, the likelihood is you're working long hours for lower wages if you're lucky enough to have a job. [applause]

And I want everybody here to know this is not just -- I'm using West Virginia statistics tonight because I'm here. This is a national issue and that is why together we are going to create an economy that works for all of our people not just the people on top. [applause]

Couple of years ago I was chairman of a subcommittee in the Senate and we did a hearing on poverty as a death sentence. You know what I mean by that? [applause]

This is what I mean by that. When you hear about people being poor, people say, "well, that's too bad. They don't have a good car, their housing is really not good. They don't have enough money to go out to eat. It's really bad being poor." Being poor is much, much more than that. What being poor is about in America is you die at a significantly lower age than people who have money. [applause]

McDowell County here in West Virginia is one of the poorest counties in the United States of America. The United States of America being the richest country in the history of the world. In McDowell County, 77 percent of the children under 18 are living in poverty in the United States of America. [applause]

In McDowell County, men can only expect to live until the age of 63. [applause]

Now I want you to think about this. Again, being poor means -- it's not just you don't have the big flat screen TV or a fancy car. It means that you are dying at a significantly lower age than your fellow Americans. If you drive -- for example -- drive six miles north from this county, you go to Fairfax County, Virginia. In Fairfax County, men live on average until the age of 82 years of age -- 18 years more than men live (sic) in McDowell County.

The average life expectancy for a women in Fairfax County is 85. In McDowell County it is 73 years of age. [applause]

And it's not just McDowell County. We have counties like that -- maybe not so bad -- all over this country. These are issues of inequality that as a nation we have got to address. [applause]

Now, you know, one of the issues that I talk about a whole lot and it's directly related to poverty, directly related to unemployment is the fact that we have a broken criminal justice system. [applause]

Again, what this campaign is asking all of you is to think outside of the box -- think outside of the status quo, think beyond the options that corporate television allow you to envisage. [applause]

Think about why people in McDowell County die at a significantly lower age than people in wealthier communities. Think about why it is that in city after city in America we have youth unemployment levels of 40, 50, 60 percent and that relates to an international embarrassment that we have more people in jail than any other country on earth. [applause]

This is the United States of America. We should have the best educated people in the world. [applause]

Our people should have decent paying jobs not rot in jail. [applause]

Now, this campaign is going to win because we are doing something unusual. We are talking to the American people and not just the wealthy campaign contributors. [applause]

And when I talk about unpleasant truths that all of us have to address, truth number one is that we have a corrupt campaign finance system which is undermining America democracy. [applause]

Think outside of the box. What does democracy mean? Is it not a complicated complex. It means that you have a vote, you got a vote, you got a vote, majority wins. [applause]

Democracy does not mean that the Coke brothers and a few other billionaires can spend hundreds of millions of dollars to buy elections. [applause]

That is not democracy, my friends. That is called oligarchy. [applause]

And if we do not turn things around we will increasingly see an economy and a government run by a handful of billionaires and together we will not allow that to happen. [applause]

But is it not just -- it is not just a corrupt campaign finance system that we're going to have to address. It is a rigged economy. [applause]

And this is what a rigged economy means. It means today and listen to this. This is really pretty unbelievable. The top one tenth of one percent -- not one percent -- one tenth of one percent now owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. [applause]

In America today, the wealthiest 20 people own more wealth than the bottom half of America -- 150 million people. [applause]

In American today, one family -- the Waltons family of Walmart -- one family owns more wealth than the bottom 40 percent of the American people. [applause]

And you know what I say? I say enough is enough. [applause]

But it is not only an unfair distribution of wealth. It is income as well. Again, I want to say this to the young people who may not believe me and I want you to check it -- Google it after you get out of here. Not now. [laughter]

But here is the fact -- 40 years ago before the explosion of technology, before the cell phones and the space age technology and before the global economy it was possible in America for one person -- one breadwinner to earn enough money to take care of the entire family. [applause]

One breadwinner could take -- earn enough money to take care of the entire family. Well, then you got the whole global economy, all of the technology, you know what happens. Today, mom is out working, dad is out working, the kids are out working and they have less disposable income than a one breadwinner family had 40 years ago. Something is wrong with our economy. [applause]

In America today, in Vermont, West Virginia, you got people working not one job. They're working two jobs, they're working three jobs. You got people working longer hours for lower wages. We are going to create an economy that protects the needs of our workers, our children, our seniors, our veterans. All of the people of this country and not just the one percent. [applause]

Now, what does that mean? Is that a hard thing to do? No, it's not. Let me give you an example of some of what we have got to do. Number one, in America if you work 40 hours a week you should not be living in poverty. We're going to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour. [applause]

Fifteen bucks an hour will mean that millions of people will be able to support their families with the kind of dignity and security that they do not have today. [applause]

And second when we talk about equitable wages we're going to end the absurdity of women making $0.79 on the dollar compared to men ... [applause]

And I know that every man here will join the women in the fight for pay equity. [applause]

When unemployment rates throughout this country are extremely high especially in urban areas and in rural areas and when people are not making enough income to take care of their family, it is a no brainer to suggest we need a massive federal jobs program to put our people back to work. [applause]

In Vermont and in West Virginia and all over this country our infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, our water systems, our wastewater plants, our rail system, our airports, our levees and dams are in massive disrepair. We can create 13 million jobs with a trillion dollar investment. [applause]

Well, people say, "yeah. That's a nice idea. Yeah. Our infrastructure is crumbling. You're right, Bernie but how you going to pay for it?" I will tell you how we're going to pay for it. Right now we have a corrupt federal tax system which allows major corporations -- major corporations who make billions of dollars a year in profit to stash their profits in the Cayman Islands, Bermuda and in other tax havens. [applause]

We're going to end -- we are going to end that tax loophole. A hundred billion a year we invest in the infrastructure, we create the jobs that we need ... [applause]

And when we talk about the economy, we've got to talk about something that media almost never talks about. It's not a sexy -- not a sexy issue but an enormously important issue and that is our disastrous trade policies. [applause]

Again, let me tell the young people something they may not know and that is there was actually once a time not so many years ago when you could go to a department store and buy products manufactured in the United States of America. [applause]

But as a result of trade policies like NAFTA and permanent normal trade relations with China, policies written by corporate America -- what happened is companies shut down plants in Vermont, West Virginia and all over this country. They said, "why do I want to pay somebody here $15, $20 an hour when I can go to China, Mexico, pay people pennies an hour," and that's what they did. [applause]

As a result of these terrible trade agreements we have lost millions of decent paying jobs. Millions and one of the big differences between Secretary Clinton and myself -- she supported virtually every one of these disastrous trade agreements. I have opposed them all. [applause]

And our message to corporate America is you want us to buy the products you make, make these damn products here in West Virginia and in America. [applause]

This campaign is going to win because we are listening to people whose voices are not often heard. And one of the groups of people that I have been very proud to listen to all over this country is young people. [applause]

It's a funny thing. When we began this campaign, the general attitude of the punditry and the political scientists were, "well, young people, they're not really interested in government. They're not interested in politics. They're too busy with their video games or whatever else they do." Well, it turns out that the young people of this country are a lot smarter than many of the pundits thought. [applause]

If it turns out -- turns out that the young people understand. They are the future of this country and they want to help shape that future. [applause]

And young people understand that there is something profoundly wrong when in this country today the young generation may be the first generation in the modern history of America to have a lower standard of living than their parents. [applause]

That's right. My father came to this country at the age of 17 with money. He never made any money but we work hard and my mom worked hard and their dream was that their kids -- my brother and I would be financially better off than they were. That is called the American dream that millions of American families have experienced. Parents work hard so their kids can do better than they. [applause]

And together -- together that American dream -- that American dream -- we will not allow to die. [applause]

There's another issue out there that young people all over the country talk to me about. And they say, "Bernie, we did what our parents told us to do, what our teachers told us to do, what our community told us to do and that is go out and get the best education that we can." Because we all understand that learning and education is inherent in who we are as human beings and that also for our country to do well in the future we need the best educated work force in the world. [applause]

So millions -- millions of young people did the right thing. They went to college but then what happened is they left school 30, 50, $70,000 in debt. [applause]

And I have talked to people who are paying off that debt for decades. [applause]

They can't afford to buy a car, buy a house, get married, have kids because they're paying off that debt. For what crime did they commit? For getting an education. That is nuts. [applause]

All of you know that 40 or 50 years ago if you had a high school degree the likelihood was that you were able to go out and get a halfway decent job and make it into the middle class with a high school degree. But the world has changed, the economy has changed, technology has changed, people today need more education than they did 50 years ago. [applause]

And thinking outside of the box, outside of the status quo leads you to a very simple conclusion. Fifty years ago it was great that we had free public education from first grade to 12th grade. That was great. But the world has changed and when we talk about public education today it must mean making public colleges and universities tuition free. [applause]

Now think for a moment there are people who have attacked me on this. Oh, saying it's a radical idea, Bernie. This is not a radical idea. It exists in countries like Germany already and Scandinavia. They understand that investing in their young people is investing in the future of their country. [applause]

And by the way, you may not know this but 50 years ago in the United States of America our major great public colleges and universities were virtually tuition free. If we could have virtually free tuition 50 years ago, we damn well can do it today. [applause]

Now, once again -- once again this proposal which by the way also includes dealing with the crisis of student debt today because we have millions of people dealing with student debt and our proposal will allow people with student debt to refinance their loans at the lowest interest rates they can find. [applause]

Just out of curiosity, how many people here are carrying student debt right now. [applause]

OK. All right. We are going to lower than student debt. [applause]

Now, my critics say, "hey, Bernie. You're a nice guy. You're giving out free tuition, you're going to lower student debt. Where you going to get the money?" OK. And here is the point. I want you to think again outside of the box. This is not the dynamic that the media provides but you got to think through this stuff and you can. Eight, nine years ago as a result of the greed, recklessness and illegal behavior on Wall Street the Congress bailed out the big banks. [applause]

Apparently -- apparently there was plenty of money available to bail out large banks who were too big to fail. Now I believe that right now when Wall Street is doing quite well thank you that we should impose a tax on Wall Street speculation. [applause]

And that tax alone -- that one tax alone will bring in more than enough money to substantially lower student debt and make public colleges tuition free in this country. [applause]

Now, Wall Street may not like it but you know what? I could care less what Wall Street likes. [applause]

And by the way when we make public colleges and universities tuition free we do something that is really revolutionary. I want you to think about this for a second. Right now in my state and right here in West Virginia you got a lot of kids who grew up, are growing up poor whose parents never went to college and these kids never in a million years can imagine that they will go to college.

But if we can make it clear to the parents and the teachers and the children that any kid in this country who studies hard, who does his or her school work well -- those kids will be able to get a higher education. [applause]

That is revolutionary. Now I want to touch on an issue that I know is controversial here in West Virginia but it's an issue I deal with all over the country and I am not going to tell you anything different than I say in Vermont or California. [applause]

And that is -- that is that as a member of the U.S. Senate Committee on the environment I have talked to scientists all over this country and all over the world. And what the scientists tell us almost unanimously is that climate change is real. [applause]

Climate change is caused by human activity. [applause]

And climate change is already causing devastating problems in our country and around the world. [applause]

And here's what the scientists also tell and this is scary stuff. What they say is if we do not get our act together and transform our energy system away from fossil fuel then what we will be seeing in years to come is more drought, more flooding, more extreme weather disturbances, more acidification of the ocean, more rising sea levels and more international conflict as people fight over limited natural resources. [applause]

And it seems to me that to address this issue we have got to do two things. Number one, we have a moral obligation to our kids and future generations to make certain that we leave this planet in a way that is healthy and habitable. [applause]

But second of all, we have a moral obligation to protect those workers in the fossil fuel industry. [applause]

We cannot leave those people in the coal industry, in the oil industry, in the gas industry high and dry. We cannot go that and that is why ... [applause]

That is why we have a moral obligation to make certain that those people who may lose their jobs get new jobs. [applause]

And get the education and all of the benefits that they deserve. [applause]

When we think outside of the box we have to ask ourselves some simple questions. How does it happen that every major country on earth guarantees health care to all of their people except the United States? [applause]

I'm a member of the committee that helped write the Affordable Care Act. They Affordable Care Act has done a lot of good things but -- but today 29 million people have no health insurance still. Many of you are underinsured with high co-payments and high deductibles and the drug companies rip us all off by charging us the highest price [inaudible] ... [applause]

And that is why I believe we need to move toward a Medicare for all single payer [inaudible] ... [applause]

Think -- think about an America where every person as a right has health care. What that means is you will not have to stay on your job if you don't like that job just because you got health care on that job. [applause]

Think about going to the doctor when you're sick not having to worry about a co-payment or a deductible. [applause]

And think about a Medicare for all program saving the average family thousands of dollars a year on their health insurance. [applause]

And when we talk about health care let me deal very briefly with an issue that is on the minds of all of you in West Virginia and in my state of Vermont. There is no debate but that we have a tragic crisis in America today with opiate and heroin addiction. [applause]

And I know -- I know that it is a serious crisis here but trust me it is a serious crisis in my state as well. And the issue of how we deal with it seems to me to reach the conclusion that we have got to deal with substance abuse and addiction as a health issue, not a criminal issue. [applause]

What does that mean? What it means and again think outside of the box. What it means is that we have got to revolutionize mental health treatment in America. [applause]

We have got to provide treatment to people when they need it not six months from now. [applause]

And on another issue relating to drugs, one of the problems with our criminal justice system is that over the last 30 years millions of people have received criminal records because of possession of marijuana. [applause]

And if you have a criminal record you know what? And you're a kid it is hard to go out and get a job. We have got to rethink the so-called war on drugs. [applause]

Right now -- right now under the federal controlled substance act -- federal controlled substance act marijuana is listed as a schedule I drug next to heroin. [applause]

Now, scientists argue -- scientists argue the pluses and minuses of marijuana but marijuana is not heroin which is a killer drug. [applause]

And that is why I have legislation in that will take marijuana out of the federal controlled substance act. [applause]

Legalizing -- legalizing marijuana is a state issue. It should not be a federal crime. [applause]

Everybody here knows a profound lesson of American history and that is that real change never takes place from the top on down. It always takes place from the bottom up. [applause]

A hundred years ago when workers in West Virginia and all over this country were forced to work seven days a week, 12 hours a day, when kids were working in the mines and in the factories, working people came together to form trade unions so they could have some dignity on the job. [applause]

And that's what happens when people come together. A hundred years ago in this country and the kids don't know this -- women did not have the right to vote, did not have the right to get the education or the jobs they wanted less than a hundred years ago. [applause]

But what happened? Women stood up. [applause]

Women fought back and with their male allies they said, "you know what? In America, women will not be second class citizens." [applause]

Hundreds of years ago amidst the abomination of slavery African Americans and their allies had a different vision for America. Some of them went to jail, some of them died, some of them were beaten but they said that in America we will end racism, segregation and [inaudible] ... [applause]

If we were here in this room 10 years ago which is no time at all from a historical perspective and somebody jumps up and says, "you know, Bernie, I think that by the year 2015 gay marriage will be legal in 50 states of this country..." [applause]

The person next to him would have said, "you're crazy. Not going to happen. Not going to happen." But because the gay community and their straight allies were prepared to take on bigotry and hatred we've succeeded in making gay marriage legal. [applause]

If we were here five years ago -- five years ago, somebody jumps up and says, "Bernie, a $7.25 federal minimum wage is a starvation wage. We have to raise that wage to $15 an hour." The person next to her would have said, "$15 an hour? You want to more than double the minimum wage? You're nuts. You're thinking too big. It can't happen. Maybe $8, maybe nine -- 15 -- too high." But you know what happened? Workers in the fast food industry in MacDonald's, Burger King, Wendy's went out on strike. [applause]

They stood up and they fought back and then two years ago in Seattle, Los Angeles, San Francisco, $15 an hour minimum wage. [applause]

In Oregon, in California, New York State, $15 an hour minimum wage. [applause]

What is my point? My point is that ideas today that seem so radical -- raising the minimum wage, making public colleges and universities tuition free, providing health care for all people as a right, having paid family and medical leave ... [applause]

Ending a corrupt campaign finance system ... [applause]

Addressing the crisis of climate change, making sure that women are paid equal pay for equal work ... [applause]

Making sure our kids have jobs not jail cells ... [applause]

All of these ideas today they seem radical but they are not radical. They are ideas that in fact are supported by the vast majority of the American people. [applause]

But they are not supported by the billionaire class, by Wall Street and corporate America. [applause]

So what this campaign is about is asking millions of people throughout this country -- working people, middle class people, young people, old people, gay people, straight people, black, white, Latino, Asian-American, Native American ... [applause]

Making certain that the Donald Trumps of the world do not divide us up. [applause]

Understanding that when we stand together there is nothing -- nothing that we cannot accomplish. [applause]

Now, on May 10th there is going to be a very important primary here in West Virginia. [applause]

And what we have learned in this campaign is when there are large voter turnouts we win. When they are low voter turnouts we lose. [applause]

All right. That's what I want to hear. [applause]

I hope -- I hope that on May 10th, West Virginia will have the largest voter turnout in the history of the state. [applause]

And I hope very much that West Virginia will join the political revolution. Thank you all very much. [applause]

Hello! Thank you! Thank you, Carson! [applause]
Let me -- let me begin by thanking all of you. What a fantastic turnout. Thank you so much. [applause]

And let me thank Jim Sobel, and Nick Zano, and Francis Fisher, and Hollis Longwear, and Adriana Aravalo, and Gil Sedilio, Kendrick Sampson -- and let me give a special thanks to a very good friend of mine and one of the great actors in our country, Danny Glover. [applause]

Danny is not only an extraordinary actor but, as many of you know, he has spent his entire adult life fighting for economic justice, social justice, racial justice. Danny, thank you for all that you have done. [applause]

Let me also take this opportunity to say a word of thanks to the people of Kentucky. In a closed primary -- something I am not all that enthusiastic about where independents are not allowed to vote... [boos] ... where Secretary Clinton defeated Barack Obama by 250,000 votes in 2008, it ends up tonight we're going to end up with about half of the delegates from Kentucky. [applause]

I want to thank you all for coming out because this is, in a sense, the beginning of the final push to win California. [applause]

When we -- and by the way, I should tell you that there are a lot of people out there -- many of the pundits and politicians -- they say "Bernie Sanders should drop out." [boos]

"The people of California should not have the right to determine who the next president will be." [boos]

Well, let me be as clear as I can be. I agree with you. We are in until the last ballot is cast. [applause]

You know, when we began this campaign a little over a year ago, we were 60 points behind Secretary Clinton in the polls. We had no political organization, no money, very little name recognition. The media and the pundits determined that we were a fringe candidacy. [boos]

And nobody -- nobody thought that this campaign was going anywhere. And on top of all of that, we were taking on the most powerful political organization in the country; an organization that elected Bill Clinton twice and ran a strong campaign for Hillary Clinton in 2008. [boos]

Well, a lot has changed in the last year. [applause]

As of today, we have won 19 state primaries and caucuses and over 9 million votes. [applause]

No one can predict the future, but I think we have a real shot to win primaries in a number of the states that will be coming up. [applause]

And don't tell Secretary Clinton; she might get nervous. I think we're going to win here in California. [applause]

And as all of you know, California has 475 pledged delegates. [applause]

And let me mention something else. I am especially proud that in, I believe, every primary and caucus, those we won and those we lost, we have received a significant majority of the votes of young people. [applause]

And by the way -- and by the way, one -- you know one of the things about getting older, the older you get, you know -- well, yeah -- people who are older appear to be younger. That's what it is. So, we are winning people 45 years of age or younger and what that tells me is that our vision, a vision of social justice, economic justice, racial justice, and environmental justice, that is the future of this country. [applause]

As of today, I am proud to tell you that taking on virtually the entire democratic establishment, almost all of the Senators, the Members of the House, mayors, governors -- we have won over 45% of the pledged delegates. [applause]

And in a couple of weeks if we can win big in New Jersey, New Mexico, North and South Dakota, Montana, California, we have the possibility. It will be a steep climb. I recognize that. But we have the possibility of going to Philadelphia with the majority of the pledged delegates. [applause]

Now, some people say that we've got a steep hill to climb to do that, and that is absolutely true. But you know what? Together we have been climbing that steep hill from day one in this campaign, and we're going to continue to fight for every last vote until June 14, and then we're going to take our fight into the convention. [applause]

You know, there is -- there is a lot of discussion about the role of super-PACs. [boos]

And I am very proud to tell you I am the only candidate running for president who does not have a super-PAC. We made a decision when we began this campaign that we were not going to beg Wall Street, or corporate America, or billionaires for campaign contributions. And as of today, without a super-PAC, we have received almost 8 million individual campaign contributions. Anybody know what that average contribution is? That's right, $27. And what that shows the world, in a time when big money is dominating our political process, is that you can run a strong, winning national campaign without begging billionaires for campaign contributions. [applause]

Let me -- let me also mention something that a lot of people may not be aware of and that is that virtually every national and state poll taken in the last six weeks -- in all of those polls, we are defeating Donald Trump. [applause]

And not only are we defeating Trump, in most cases by double digits, in almost every case, whether -- in almost every case, whether it is a national poll or state poll, we do much better against Trump then does Secretary Clinton. [applause]

A poll just came out -- I think it was yesterday in the state of Georgia -- not a very good state for us -- Trump was beating Secretary Clinton by four points, and we were beating him by five points.

If the Democratic -- if the Democratic Party wants to be certain that Donald Trump is defeated -- and that we must do -- we, together, are the campaign to do that. And it is not just -- it is not just the polls -- the polls go up, the polls go down. What it is, is that our campaign has the energy and the enthusiasm and the grassroots capability. [applause]

The grassroots capability to make certain that in November, in the general election, we have a huge voter turnout. Here is a political truism: when the voter turnout is low, and people are demoralized and don't come out to vote, Republicans win. When there is excitement, and energy, and people are prepared to stand up and fight back, progressives and Democrats win -- that is our campaign. [applause]

I don't have to explain to anybody here that the American people will not elect a candidate like Donald Trump who insults Mexicans and Latinos. [boos]

Who insults Muslims; who insults women and veterans; and who is a leader of the so-called birther movement, tries to delegitimize the presidency of our first African-American president. [boos]

We will not accept as President a man who wants to give hundreds of billions of dollars in tax breaks to billionaire families like his, but who has told us that we do not have to worry about raising the starvation minimum wage of $7.25 an hour. We will not accept a President who recklessly talks about using nuclear weapons and who changes his mind every day on every issue. [boos]

Let me also say a word to the leadership of the Democratic Party. And that is -- that is -- that the Democratic Party is going to have to make a very, very profound and important decision. It can do the right thing and open its doors and welcome into the party people who are prepared to fight for real economic and social change. [applause]

That is the Democratic Party I want to see, bringing in people who are willing to take on Wall Street; to take on corporate greed; and to take on a fossil fuel industry which is destroying this planet. So I say to the leadership of the Democratic Party, open the door, let the people in.

Or, the other option -- the other option for the Democratic Party, which I see as a very sad and tragic option, is the truce to maintain its status quo structure, remain dependent on big money campaign contributions, and be a party with limited participation and limited energy; and a party which, incredibly, is allowing a right- wing extremist Republican Party to capture the votes of a majority of working people in this country. Now, I come from the working class of this country, and I will be damned -- I will be damned if we will allow the Republican Party, whose job is to represent the rich and the powerful, to win the votes of working-class Americans. Let me say a word about why I think this campaign is doing so well. You know why? Because we are doing something very unusual. We are telling the American people the truth. [applause]

And here is a very important truth. If we as a nation do not get our act together, this great nation is going to slip into in oligarchic form of society, where a handful of billionaires control our political and economic life. Let me tell you how absurd it is. It was just announced the other day, the Koch brothers -- the second wealthiest family in America, a family worth tens of billions of dollars, extremely right-wing -- are contributing over $40 million to try and make the United States Senate stay Republican; $40 million. And here is what is even crazier -- a guy named Sheldon Adelson, also one of the wealthiest people in America -- this is a billionaire who is prepared to contribute huge sums of money to another billionaire, named Donald Trump. The American people are sick and tired of billionaires running our economy and our political lives. [applause]

Together, we are going to overturn this disastrous Citizens United Supreme Court decision, and we are going to move toward public funding of elections. I want this country to be a vibrant democracy, and that means whether you're progressive, conservative, or moderate, if you want to run for office, you should not have to beg millionaires for campaign contributions. [applause]

I want this country to have one of the highest voter turnout rates in the world, not one of the lowest. But before we will have the opportunity to defeat Donald Trump, we are going to have to defeat Secretary Clinton. [applause]

A campaign is about issues and ideas, and let me very briefly and straight-forwardly tell you some of the differences between Secretary Clinton and myself:

Number one, I am proud to tell you I don't have a super-PAC and I don't get money from Wall Street. Secretary Clinton has a number of super-PACs, and in the last filing period, reported receiving $15 million from Wall Street. Our job is to take on Wall Street, not take their money. [applause]

Federal minimum wage of $7.25 is a starvation wage. Secretary Clinton wants to raise that to $12 an hour. That is OK. but it is not good enough.

Hold that sign up, let everybody see it. We are talking about a fight for $15 an hour. I am proud to tell you, I have been on the picket line with those workers. They are standing up and fighting for a living wage, and all of us will stand with them. [applause]

My wife just tells me that CNN has called Oregon for Bernie Sanders. [applause]

We won. You know, we won a great victory in the state of Washington a few months ago. We just won Oregon. [applause]

And we are going to win California. [applause]

I am getting to like the West Coast. [applause]

This campaign -- when we talk about equitable wages, it is not just that -- you know, raising the minimum wage to a living wage. It is also ending the disgrace of women making $.79 on the dollar compared to men. And together, I know that every man here will stand with the women in the fight for pay equity. [applause]

I am a member of the U.S. Senate Committee on the Environment and I will tell you what all of you know, and that is that climate change is real. It is caused by human activity and, as everybody in California knows, it is already causing devastating problems. You in California have witnessed the devastating impact of climate change with your own eyes. You have seen historic wildfires, which scorched 118,000 acres of land here in California in 2014. You have seen massive mudslides; you have seen rising sea levels; you experienced a massive heatwave in 2006. We have a moral obligation -- a moral obligation to transform our energy system away from fossil fuels... [applause] ... to energy efficiency and sustainable energy. [applause]

In my view, if we are prepared to be aggressive in transforming our energy system, we need a tax on carbon. We cannot allow, with impunity, the fossil fuel industry to destroy our planet. I believe in a tax on carbon because I see climate change as one of the great global crises that we face. Secretary Clinton does not support a tax on carbon. [boos]

One of the great crises that we are beginning to see unfold is whether or not, in our country and around the world, we will have the clean drinking water that our people need. And that is why I believe we should move for a ban on fracking. [applause]

That is my view. Unfortunately, it is not Secretary Clinton's view. In fact -- in fact, when she was Secretary of State, she pushed fracking technology onto countries around the world. [boos]

The great -- the great foreign policy debate -- the most important debate that we have had in the modern history of our country centered around Iraq, and whether to go into Iraq. I listened very carefully to what President Bush, and Dick Cheney, and the others had to say. I voted against that war. [applause]

Secretary Clinton voted for that war. [boos]

I believe that when you have a handful of large financial institutions on Wall Street -- institutions who have a business model of fraud; institutions which through their illegal behavior and their greed drove this country into the worst economic downturn since the great depression -- I believe that now is the time to break them up! [applause]

That is my view. That is not Secretary Clinton's view. [boos]

One of the reasons that the middle class of this country has been in decline for the last 35 years has to do with a disastrous trade policy which has ended up shutting down thousands of factories in America, as companies shut down here -- the workers out on the street -- and move to China and other low-wage countries. [boos]

I voted against every one of those disastrous trade agreements. [applause]

Secretary Clinton supported almost all of them. [boos]

What this campaign is about is whether or not we are going to create an economy that works for all of us, or an economy that continues to work for the 1 percent. [boos]

It is not acceptable to me that in America today we have more income and wealth inequality than any other major country on Earth. It is worse now than at any time since 1928. It is not acceptable that the top one-tenth of 1 percent now owns almost as much wealth as the bottom 90 percent. It is not acceptable to me that in my state of Vermont, and here in California, and all over this country, we have millions of people who are working not one job, but two jobs and three jobs to cobble together the income and health care they need. And yet, when mom works, dad works, and the kids work, it adds up that 58 percent of all new income goes to the top 1 percent. That is not acceptable. [boos]

This campaign is listening to the American people, and not just to wealthy campaign contributors. [applause]

This campaign is listening to young people. [applause]

And young people are asking me "how does it happen that when they do the right thing, when they go out and get the best education they can, they end up $30,000, $50,000, $70,000 in debt?" [boos]

We should not be punishing people for getting an education; we should reward them. [applause]

Forty or 50 years ago, if you had a high school degree, you were in pretty good shape. You could go out and get yourself a good job. Those days, by and large, are gone. We have a changing economy, changing technology, and a changing global economy. We need to have the best educated workforce in the world. [applause]

And that means that when we think about public education, it is not good enough now just to think about first grade through 12th grade. We need to make public colleges and universities tuition free. [applause]

I want every kid in California in the fourth grade, and in sixth grade -- kids in Vermont -- to understand that if they study hard and take school seriously, no matter what the income their family is, they will be able to get a college education. [applause]

How many people here are carrying student debt right now? [applause]

I have talked to people all over this country -- people $50,000, 100,000 -- $100,000 in debt. For what crime did they commit? That they went out and got a decent education? That is crazy stuff. So we are going to give people with student debt the right to refinance their loans at the lowest interest rate they can find. [applause]

And people say -- you know, my critics say "Well, Bernie, you're Santa Claus. You're giving away free tuition; you're going to lower student debt; how are going to you pay for it? I will tell you exactly how we will pay for it. In 2009, Congress, against my vote, bailed out the crooks on Wall Street. Today, Wall Street is doing just fine, and I think it is appropriate to impose a tax on Wall Street speculations. [applause]

And that tax will more than pay for free tuition and public colleges and universities and in lowering student debt. [applause]

Now, Wall Street does not like that idea, and I say, so what?

If we win this election, Wall Street and the other people who now run this country, are going to learn a very profound lesson. And that is, they will not continue to get it all. [applause]

I am sick and tired of the greed of corporate America and the greed of Wall Street. We need a new moral compass in this country. [applause]

You know, Pope Francis talks about a moral economy -- a moral economy, and I agree with him. That is what we need. [applause]

This campaign is listening to our Latino brothers and sisters. [applause]

My father -- my father came to this country at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket, so I know a little bit about the immigrant experience. [applause]

There are 11 million undocumented people in this country today. Many of them are being exploited on the job because when you don't have legal rights -- when you don't have legal rights, you can't stand up and protect yourself. And that is why I believe we must pass comprehensive immigration reform and a path to citizenship. [applause]

And that is why I believe we must stop, immediately, the current deportation policy. And if Congress does not do its job, I will use the executive powers of the presidency to do it right. [applause]

This campaign is listening to our brothers and sisters in the African-American community. [applause]

And they are asking me a very simple but important question; how does it happen that this country has trillions of dollars to spend on a war in Iraq we never should have gotten into, but, somehow, we don't have the available funds to rebuild our inner cities? [applause]

I have been to Flint, Michigan and visited with parents whose children have been poisoned by lead in the water. [boos]

I have been to Detroit, Michigan where their public school system is on the verge of a physical collapse. [boos]

I have been to Baltimore, Maryland where tens of thousands of people are addicted to drugs and do not have the treatment available to get them off that heroin. [boos]

We, as a nation, together, are going to change our national priorities. [applause]

We are going to rebuild our inner cities, build affordable housing, and create decent schools for our children. [applause]

And this campaign is listening to people whose pain is almost never heard, and that is our Native American brothers and sisters. [applause]

We owe the first Americans a debt of gratitude that we can never repay. They have taught us so much, including the very important lesson that as human beings -- all of us are part of nature. We must live with nature. [applause]

And, we cannot continue to destroy nature, because if we destroy nature, we are destroying ourselves. [applause]

Together, this campaign, and our presidency are going to reform a broken criminal justice system. [applause]

It is not acceptable, I believe, to any of us, that we have 2.2 million people in jail today, more than any other country on Earth. [boos]

Instead of seeing kids around this country in inner cities or rural America, experiencing 40 percent, 50 percent unemployment rates, we are going to put those kids to work in good jobs. And we are going to invest in education for them, not jail or incarceration. [applause]

We want this country to be the best-educated country on Earth, not the country with more people in jail. [applause]

What this campaign is about is thinking outside of the box, outside of the status quo. Every other major country on Earth, whether it's the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Scandinavia, Canada -- every major country guarantees health care to all of their people as a right. [applause]

The Affordable Care Act has done some very good things, but we have a lot more to do. I believe, from the deepest part of my soul, that health care is a right, not a privilege. [applause]

Today, we have 29 million peoples with no insurance, even more who are underinsured, with large deductibles and copayments. And every one of us is getting ripped off by the greed of the drug companies. [boos]

Pharmaceutical industries charge us by far the highest prices in the world for the medicine we need. By the way, on the ballot in November here in California, you are going to have a proposition making sure that California can control the outrageously high cost of prescription drugs. [applause]

I congratulate those people who put that item on the ballot -- let's pass it. [applause]

Together, we will end the fact that we are the only country -- major country without health care for all -- that we pay far more per capita for health care than any other country. We are going to end that by passing a Medicare-for-all health care system. [applause]

Now, the insurance companies may not like it; the drug companies may not like it. But the American people do like it, and that's what we've got to do. [applause]

This campaign understands a very, very important historical lesson. That lesson is that no real change has ever occurred in our country from the top on down. It has always been from the bottom on up. [applause]

Think back -- think back 120 years ago, when workers in this country were forced to work seven days a week, 14 hours a day. They had no rights on the job. Think about the children -- 10, 11 years of age, losing fingers in factories, and what the working people of this country said. Sorry, we are human beings, we are not beasts of burden. We are going to form trade unions and negotiate contracts. [applause]

And I thank the trade union movement for creating the American middle class. [applause]

Think about 150 years ago, in the midst of the abomination of slavery. There were African Americans and their allies who were prepared to go to jail to get beaten, to get lynched, who stood up and said that they will come in this country when we will end racism, and bigotry, and segregation. [applause]

And over the years, millions of people were engaged in that struggle. Think about where we were as a country 100 years ago -- not such a long time ago. 100 years ago, women in America did not have the right to vote. They could not get the education or the job they wanted. But women stood up and fought back. [applause]

Women stood up to the establishment, which said to them "Your job is to stay home and have babies." [boos]

But women said "You will not define us. We will define ourselves." [applause]

And women and their male allies said loudly and clearly "Women in America will not be second-class citizens." [applause]

If we were here ten years ago -- no time at all -- somebody jumps up and says "You know Bernie, I think that, say, by the year 2015, gay marriage will be legal in every state in this country." [applause]

If somebody said that, the person next to them would have said "You are nuts." What happened? But what happened is the gay community and their straight allies stood up against incredible bigotry. [applause]

Against all kinds of abuse. And they said together that in this country, people should have the right to love whoever they want, regardless of their gender. [applause]

And let me give you a more contemporary example. If five years ago, somebody here stood up and said "Bernie, this $7.25 minimum wage, that's really awful and terrible, we've got to raise it to 15 bucks an hour", the person next to him what have said "$15 an hour? You are nuts. You are thinking too radically. You are an extremist." But then, what happened? We've got some of them here -- workers in the fast food industry went out on strike.

Workers -- workers in McDonalds, and in Burger King, and in Wendy's and Subway, and in all these places, they told their community and they told the world they cannot live on $7.25 an hour. And you know what happened after the strikes and demonstrations in Seattle, here in Los Angeles, in San Francisco? Fifteen dollars an hour. [applause]

And if I have anything to say about it -- and I will as President -- $15 an hour in every state in this country. [applause]

What is my point? Here is my point. Throughout -- let me kick off my point, but I want to...[laughter]...I want you to think about this: throughout history -- throughout history, people looked around them. If they were a worker, working seven days a week with no power, they saw that as being unjust, unfair. They stood up and they fought back. In the days of terrible segregation and slavery, people said "America will not be racist." Women fought back. The gay community fought back. Low income workers fought back. That's what change is about.

And right now -- right now, from coast-to-coast -- and I have been from Maine to California -- I have seen millions of people looking around them, and they're saying "Wait a second, what is going on in our country where we have such a grotesque level of income and wealth inequality, and almost all new income and wealth is going to the top 1 percent? What is going on when the middle class continues to disappear, and we have more children -- we have a higher rate of childhood poverty that almost any country on Earth? What is going on when we are the only major country on Earth not to guarantee paid family and medical leave? Not to guarantee health care to all people? What is going on when women are making 79 cents on the dollar?" [boos]

And when young people are leaving school $50,000 in debt. [boos]

Though what the establishment wants you to believe is that real change effectively dealing with these issues is impossible -- it's too big, it's too radical. [boos]

The options they want to give you -- the media wants to give you, Congress wants to give you -- should we cut food stamps or should we cut education? [boos]

We do not accept those choices. We're going to ask... [applause]

At a time of massive income and wealth inequality -- yeah, we are going to tell the wealthiest people in largest corporations, they are going to start paying their fair share in taxes. [applause]

If the American people are prepared to reject the Donald Trumps of the world who want to divide us up -- they want to divide us up -- but if we stand together as black, and white, and Latino, and Asian American, and Native American; if we stand together as gay and straight, male and female...[applause]

If we stand together as people born in this country and people who come into this country. [applause]

If we stand together and have the courage to take on the billionaire class -- to demand a government which represents all of us and not just the 1 percent -- together there is nothing we cannot accomplish.

As all of you know, in a few weeks there is going to be of an enormously important primary here in California. [applause]

And what I have found throughout this campaign is that we win primaries and caucuses when the voter turnout is high. We lose when it is low. Let us have, in the California Democratic primary, the largest voter turnout in the history of the state. [applause]

And let this great state show the world that you are prepared to help lead our nation into the political revolution. Thank you very much. [applause]